docs(rfc): add accessibility RFC (#463)
razorpay/blade: rfcs/2022-04-09-accessibility.md

Checklist:

- Do all the interactive elements in the page are:
  - Navigatable through keyboard? ([Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G202))
  - Actions can be triggered by keyboard? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F54.html))
  - Remains focused until user moves it? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F55.html))
- Does the tab order match the logical reading order of the page? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44.html))
- Focus visible ([Failure Of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F78.html))
  - Do all keyboard interactive elements display visual keyboard focus?
  - Is the visual keyboard focus easy to identify?
- During the navigation, are there any instances when you become trapped in an element? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F10.html))
- Make sure hidden popuops or titles are accessible through keyboard.

## Focus management

> > Specification

Reviewer: link?

| `assertive`     | Indicates that updates to the region have the highest priority and should be presented the user immediately.                                                                   |
| `off (default)` | Indicates that updates to the region should not be presented to the user unless the user is currently focused on that region.                                                  |
| `polite`        | Indicates that updates to the region should be presented at the next graceful opportunity, such as at the end of speaking the current sentence or when the user pauses typing. |

#### Platform Specific Implementation <!-- omit in toc -->

**Web:**

In web we can simply add `aria-live` to any element or use [roles which have implicit live region attributes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions#roles_with_implicit_live_region_attributes)

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-rfc-arialive-demo-h53z61?file=/src/App.tsx)

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/170882365-47b9caa8-eff8-4572-a319-d0f63785f497.mov

> We can also use the [@react-aria/live-announcer](https://github.com/adobe/react-spectrum/tree/main/packages/%40react-aria/live-announcer) package which gives us programmatic way of triggering announcements with `announce()` function, by creating temporary live-regions.

Reviewer: how do we decide whether to use `aria-live` attribute or this utility?

Author: So the difference this announce() utility will be handy because this utility will create hidden DOM nodes with VisuallyHidden programatically thus it won't be visible to users. But with aria-live we have to manually make sure it's hidden. 

It's based on our usecases.

Reviewer: makes sense. but can't button loading have 

`<button aria-live={isLoading? 'assertive':undefined}>Submit Form</button>

Author: It will work, but it's not the correct way to handle live announcements, live announcements should always have their own independent container... putting aria-live directly inside the button you are coupling the announcement to the button's text tightly and there is no way to have different announcement and different text for button. 

You'll need to do this
```ts
<button aria-live={isLoading? 'assertive':undefined}>{isLoading ? "Loading" : "Submit button"}</button>
```

With this example how would you let users know that button has stopped loading? You cannot announce "Finished loading" since if you do the button's text will also say "Finished loading"

**Native:**

In react-native we have a [announceForAccessibility](https://reactnative.dev/docs/accessibilityinfo#announceforaccessibility) API in AccessibilityInfo interface for announcing dynamic content:

> [Demo](https://snack.expo.dev/K17t0cAtLj)

```ts
React.useEffect(() => {
  AccessibilityInfo.announceForAccessibility('Some content to be announced');
}, []);
```

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/170883127-b81bc324-3d5c-4b9d-905f-14733fcc821d.mp4

> ### ARIA Patterns

Reviewer: this section doesn't seems like fitting under Screen readers, feels like this is more generic?

Author: This is kind of fits, I don't know where to put it. It will just hang out in the middle of the document otherwise.

Reviewer: it can become it's own topic maybe while we are talking about ARIA things since this is setting the context and basic information.

Author: Made it it's own section instead of subsection of screen readers. makes more sense.

- Using getBy `role`, `labelText`, `altText`, `title` while testing which encourages [proper accessibility testing](https://testing-library.com/docs/dom-testing-library/api-accessibility/)
- Using [WAVE](https://wave.webaim.org/) for manual full page checks & finding accessibility issues.
- Using [Accessibility Insights for Web Chrome extension](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/accessibility-insights-fo/pbjjkligggfmakdaogkfomddhfmpjeni) *This one is very good*

**Manual Testing:**

Automated accessibility tools only [pick up around 40% of errors automatically](https://alphagov.github.io/accessibility-tool-audit/) at best, to ensure blade components are accessible it's essential to do manual testing

- Follow preliminary guide for ["A First Review of Web Accessibility"](https://www.w3.org/WAI/test-evaluate/preliminary/) by w3c
- Follow [WAI-ARIA Authoring Practices Guidelines](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/) for component specific accessibility testing
- Do [manual keyboard testing](#manual-testing)
- Do manual [screen reader testing](https://dequeuniversity.com/screenreaders/voiceover-ios-shortcuts)

> - Follow a checklist for general page wide accessibility testing

Reviewer: can we create a simple checklist optimized for our use cases and put it in some central place? every time we build a new component it's difficult for devs to go through so many things. Basically a checklist of items that all the devs shall use when building a component.

Author: Yes that makes sense, I was in fact planning to write a doc for that. But not entirely sure if Accessibility RFC is the right place to do this. Might be better if we create something like `component-development-lifecycle.md` file to document our process.

Author: Decided to decouple this as a different task to not block a11y RFC.

  - [18F checklist](https://accessibility.18f.gov/checklist/)
  - [a11y project checklist](https://www.a11yproject.com/checklist/)
  - [gov.uk](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/doing-a-basic-accessibility-check-if-you-cant-do-a-detailed-one/doing-a-basic-accessibility-check-if-you-cant-do-a-detailed-one) basic accessibility tests
  - or use WCAG [evaluation tool](https://www.w3.org/WAI/eval/report-tool/)

> # Actionable Items

Reviewer: can you make them checklist so we can tick them off when completed

**Will there be breaking changes?**

Yes there might be some breaking changes but it will depend on the component we are building, not every component will have publicly exposed accessibility props so those components wouldn't have any breaking changes, But we might need to expose few accessibility props like `accessibilityLabel` for certain components and that can cause breaking change.

**How do we communicate with other teams? Will updating docs suffice or do we need a dedicated interaction with them?** 

Making the blade components accessible out of the box should suffice although we need to communicate with other teams for new releases & improvements about accessibility so they get all the new benefits and features.

# How do we educate people?

Ideally only two people needs to be educated: 

- Blade design system designers
- Blade design system developers

This document provides enough insights, guides & best practices to ensure that designers & developers are well educated about the ins and out of building accessible components, although other teams also need to be proactive about certain things like providing proper accessibility label, alt text etc.

# Open Questions

> - Which third party library for roving tabindex pattern should we choose? 

Reviewer: i think this is already answered. let's remove it?

---
Start Date: 08-04-2022
RFC PR: (leave this empty if no PR yet)
Blade Issue: (leave this empty if no issue yet)
---

# Blade Accessibility <!-- omit in toc -->

### Table Of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Detailed Design](#detailed-design)
- [Drawbacks/Constraints](#drawbacksconstraints)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Adoption strategy](#adoption-strategy)
- [How do we educate people?](#how-do-we-educate-people)
- [Open Questions](#open-questions)
- [References](#references)

# Summary

## What is Accessibility?

Accessibility is the practice of making websites usable by people of all abilities and disabilities.   
This includes people with visual, auditory, physical, and cognitive impairments, as well as those with temporary disabilities such as broken bones, color blindness, and temporary loss of vision, but the practice of making sites accessible also benefits other groups such as people using mobile phones, people with temporary disabilities, situational limitations.

> 

Reviewer 2: Commonly I see people confuse a11y with something that isn't important for everyone. Perhaps we should add a note on how / why it's crucial for everything - for example filling forms, closing modal, etc.

Author: Correct, will add few lines to highlight why accessibility is for everyone.

Author: Will add this video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3f31oufqFSM

- Help users avoid and correct mistakes.

**Robust**

- Maximize compatibility with current and future user tools.

## Various types disabilities

- **Visual:**  
  Anything that deals with sight, eg: people who have different types of sight like color blindness.
- **Cognitive:**  
  Concentration, memory, judgment, problem solving, logic skills.
- **Mobility:**  
  Anything that affects movement in a body.
- **Auditory:**  
  Disabilities related to sound or audio.

Other subcategories based on microsoft’s inclusive design:  

- **Permanent or disability that does not go away:**:   
  - Example: Someone who is deaf
- **Temporary, disability that will go away in time:**: 
  - Example: Someone who has an ear infection
- **Situational, Context based disabilities:**: 
  - Example: Someone who is at a loud sporting event
  - Example: Using the web app in bright sunlight
  - Example: Using your phone one handedly in a crowded metro station

<img src="./images/accessibility/ms-inclusive-design.png" alt="Microsoft Inclusive Design Shows Spectrum Of Disabilities" width="25%" />

# Motivation
- Why are we doing this?
- What use cases does it support?
- What is the expected outcome?

> ## Why are we doing this? 

Reviewer 3: More rules and policies are laid out [here](https://www.w3.org/WAI/policies/).

Without proper accessibility, certain functionality used in web sites is not available to some users with disabilities, especially people who rely on screen readers and people who cannot use a mouse. 

Making our products accessible is important for two reasons.  
- it's the right thing to do. We believe that everyone deserves to be able to use our products, regardless of their abilities.
- It's good for business & branding. By making our products accessible, we can expand our potential customer base and make our products more appealing to a wider range of people, plus it helps create a good faith between consumers and our product. 

> **Making customers happy & respecting human rights:**  

Author: Yep, In india only government sites have mandatory a11y requirements by law. We could add few lines about the law too.

> **Making customers happy & respecting human rights:**  

Author: Added

In 2020, A 29 year old banker who is visually impaired opened petitions to make [zomato](https://www.change.org/p/zomato-make-zomato-accessible-with-screen-readers-for-visually-challenged-people) & [swiggy](https://www.change.org/p/swiggy-make-swiggy-accessible-with-screen-readers-in-android-for-visually-challenged-people) accessible because he couldn’t order food from it due to their inaccessible apps. 
Over **15,000 & 27,000 people had signed the petition.**
Later zomato, swiggy listened to the people and [improved their accessibility.](https://theprint.in/tech/why-the-visually-challenged-are-signing-petitions-addressed-to-apps-such-as-zomato-swiggy/507282/) 

## The current state  

> In current state, blade components are not very accessible out of the box, neither are some of our production grade mobile applications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current state, blade components are not very accessible out of the box, and neither are our existing frontend products. 
```

Here’s the screen reader accessibility of Razorpay mobile app

- Missing accessibilityLabel in input box.
- Missing accessibilityRole=button in buttons
- Missing accessibilityRole=link in links
- Grouping text together so they get announced at once.
- Unlabeled password toggle icon 
- Wrongly focus on text input's placeholder text

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/167380507-71e60b7f-d36e-42b3-b649-911400e2c66f.mp4

Even though only a few of the teams are on boarded to blade, when more teams will migrate this will become a problem since every app/site will be inaccessible if we don’t implement accessibility in blade components. 

> Adding accessible components to blade will iron out all these inconsistencies and teams can build more accessible apps without thinking about it. 

Reviewer 2: Think people will still need to think about a11y though they won't have to worry about implementation for each and every usecase. Somethings which we can't handle correctly in blade itself for example - tabbing order of inputs in forms

Author: Hmm yeah i meant that 🤔 I think wording can be improved here. For example even if we provide a <Select /> element users will still have to provide a accessible label to define what elements are in that slelect, like "aria-label='Country codes'"

## What is the expected outcome? 

> The goal of this RFC is to lay the foundations for implementing accessibility right into blade, so that blade consumers don’t have to think about accessibility while building their products: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this RFC is to lay the foundations so that we can ship blade components that are accessible out of the box such that consumers don't have to worry about every minute detail. Here are couple of areas that this RFC will touch upon
```

>  

Reviewer: the outcomes in form of functionality like what all things we are scoping to right now for example, Keyboard navigation, screen readers, focus management are not added here. do you plan to add them later?

Author: Yes we will be adding that, outcome I've kept at high level.

- Sufficient color contrast is good for different lighting conditions and people with visual impairments.
- Older people with changing abilities due to ageing can benefit from accessible experiences. 
- Good layouts and design helps users with cognitive disabilities but also people who are unconfident with technology or old aged people.
- Large buttons and links helps people with reduced dexterity but also improves user experience of mobile devices.
- Ensuring keyboard accessibility helps people with temporary/permanent mobility but also improves experience for normal users by providing better user experience for components like Select or Modals. 

> Check out this youtube [video about Web Accessibility Perspectives](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3f31oufqFSM) by W3C for more details about how accessibility can help wide range of people with or without disabilities.

## Various types disabilities

- **Visual:**  
  Anything that deals with sight, eg: people who have different types of sight like color blindness.
- **Cognitive:**  
  Concentration, memory, judgment, problem solving, logic skills.
- **Mobility:**  

>   Anything that affects movement in a body.

Author: Okay will rephrase this, what this means that say people who have mobility issues eg: broken/missing arm should also be able to operate our sites. 

This goes under having proper keyboard accessibility because people with mobility issues might not be as accurate with mouse.

Adding accessible components to blade will iron out all these inconsistencies and teams can build more accessible apps with minimal effort.

## What is the expected outcome? 

The goal of this RFC is to lay the foundations so that we can ship accessible components out of the box so that consumers don't have to worry about every minute detail. Here are couple of areas that this RFC will touch upon:

- Research about cross platform accessibility between web and native.
- Ensure components are accessible through assistive technologies.
- Ensure components adhere to the [WAI-ARIA design patterns](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/)
- Set accessibility guidelines to make sure products built with blade are accessible by people with various disabilities. 
- Document the component development lifecycle for blade developers on building accessible components. (Similar to a checklist)

By baking in accessibility at the foundational level we will ensure our products are accessible to as many people as possible, and this includes people with disabilities.

# Detailed Design

## Scope 

> - Web

Author: Yes. we can do that.

  - Screen reader support
    - Cross platform solution to aria attributes
    - Implement WAI-ARIA [design patterns](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.1/#accordion)
- A11y testing
    - Static analysis
    - Jest unit tests
    - Manual testing
- Guidelines
  - General web accessibility guidelines

## Out of scope

- [Motion](https://github.com/razorpay/blade/blob/master/rfcs/2022-03-22-motion-rfc.md)  
  We will pick up motion accessibility at a later point, we are first prioritizing foundations.

# Keyboard Accessibility

> [Specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/keyboard-operation.html)

**Target:** Everyone and especially people with motor disabilities who use a keyboard to navigate.  
**Goal:** Ensure users who cannot use the mouse (blind, motor disabilities) can access the crucial parts of the app through keyboard.  

For a web page to be accessible, all interactive elements must be operable via the keyboard. Not all users are able to use a mouse to navigate a web page, keyboard-only and screen reader users rely on navigating and using a web page with a physical or a virtual keyboard.

### Areas to cover

> - [Keyboard tab order](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#sequential-focus-navigation-order)

Author: yeah will change those.

The tab order of the page must be logical and follow the visual order of elements on the page.

**Best practices for logical tab order:**

- Structure html so that the reading/navigation [order is correct](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C27).
- If necessary, use CSS to control the visual presentation of the elements on the page.
- [Avoid using tabindex](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44) values of 1 or greater to change the default keyboard navigation order.

## Using tabindex

`tabindex` attribute authors can make the element focusable and appear in [sequential focus order](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#sequential-focus-navigation)

Setting tabindex to any non-negative integer makes elements focusable, allow or prevent them from being sequentially focusable, and determine their relative ordering

When set to `0`, the element becomes focusable by keyboard and via programmatic means with `focus()`. 
When set to `-1`, the element becomes focusable programmatically, but it does not become part of the keyboard focus order.

The following table describes tabindex behavior in modern browsers:

> | tabindex attribute |	Focusable with mouse or programmatically |	Tab navigable |

Author: clicking it will make it focusable. https://codesandbox.io/s/white-meadow-0o7chs?file=/src/App.tsx

See focus ring section for more info.

| :-- | :-- | :-- |
| not present	| The user agent will decide | The user agent will decide |
| Negative (tabindex="-1")	| Yes | No, can only be focused programmatically |
| Zero (tabindex="0") | Yes | Yes, In tab order relative to element's position in document | 
| Positive (tabindex="2") | Yes | Yes, tabindex value determines where this element is positioned in the tab order | 

> > Warning: Avoid using positive values for tabindex. Using positive values means authors will have to set (and maintain) tabindex values for all focusable elements on the page whenever they use one or more positive values for tabindex.  

Author: We discourage using positive values because positive values can cause wrong tab order 

for example: 

```
<button tabIndex="1">one</button>
<button tabIndex="2">one</button>
<button tabIndex="3">one</button>
```

The above code might look fine but since tabindex is tracked globally these buttons will always be the first ones to get focus even if they are at the end of the page, plus someone might mess up the order and cause confusion. 

>  then we shall also discourage negative values right since that will stop tab navigation

No that depends, in certain situations we want to prevent tab navigation to reduce tab stops in the page, see composite widgets section. https://github.com/razorpay/blade/blob/anu/a11y-rfc/rfcs/2022-04-09-accessibility.md#composite-widgets

We want to reduce the number of tab stops in certain elements like select-menu/combobox/radio groups etc, And let users use Arrowkeys to move between the group. 

> I'm thinking we shall discourage using tabindex altogether

In app level consumers probably wouldn’t need to use tabindex, but in component level we need to manage that to ensure focus management is handled correctly.

> *[Failure of Success Criterion 2.4.3](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44) due to using tabindex to create a tab order that does not preserve meaning and operability*

## Skip navigations

> [Specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/NOTE-WCAG20-TECHS-20130905/G1)

A skip navigation link provides a way for keyboard and screen reader users to skip to main content of a webpage.  
Without skip links, keyboard and screen reader users must navigate a long list of navigation links and other elements before ever arriving at the main content. This can be particularly difficult for users with some forms of motor disabilities.

**Temporarily hidden skip links**

Most common type of skip links are the ones that are hidden until the user navigates to it with a keyboard.

The link must be:

- Hidden by default
- Accessible to keyboard navigation
- Visible when it is focused
- Set focus to the main content area when activated

### Implementations

Skip nav implementations are fairly simple: 

> > [Live Demo](https://stackblitz.com/edit/react-ts-nnnymu?file=App.tsx)

Reviewer: the demo isn't working? 🤔

Author: Yes open the window directly, stackblitz might be messing up your focus https://react-ts-nnnymu.stackblitz.io/#main-content

```html
<body>
  <a class='skip-link' href='#main-content'>
    Skip Navigation or Skip to Content
  </a>
  <main id='main-content'>
    Content here
  </main>
</body>
```

The `skip-link` class here is a screen reader only [visually hidden](https://webaim.org/techniques/css/invisiblecontent/) class, which is only accessible through screen readers. By using the `:focus` pesudo class it becomes visible when focused.

- [ReachUI SkipNav](https://reach.tech/skip-nav/)
- [ChakraUI SkipNav](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/components/navigation/skip-nav)

> ## Composite widgets

Author: Yes will add gifs in places for easier understanding.

> A composite is a widget that may contain navigable descendants or childrens. Composite widgets should only have single navigation tab stop.

Reviewer: too much content but difficult to visualise as to what you mean here. probably a small gif or video would help understand this clearly

Author: Sure.

- Good layouts and design helps users with cognitive disabilities but also people who are unconfident with technology or old aged people.
- Large buttons and links helps people with reduced dexterity but also improves user experience of mobile devices.
- Ensuring keyboard accessibility helps people with temporary/permanent mobility but also improves experience for normal users by providing better user experience for components like Select or Modals. 

> Check out this youtube [video about Web Accessibility Perspectives](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3f31oufqFSM) by W3C for more details about how accessibility can help wide range of people with or without disabilities.

## Various types disabilities

- **Visual:**  
  Anything that deals with sight, eg: people who have different types of sight like color blindness.
- **Cognitive:**  
  Concentration, memory, judgment, problem solving, logic skills.
- **Mobility:**  
  Anything that affects movement in a body.
- **Auditory:**  
  Disabilities related to sound or audio.

Other subcategories based on [microsoft’s inclusive design](https://www.microsoft.com/design/inclusive):  

> - **Permanent or disability that does not go away:**:   

Author: 🙈

  - Example: Using your phone one handedly in a crowded metro station

<img src="./images/accessibility/ms-inclusive-design.png" alt="Microsoft Inclusive Design Shows Spectrum Of Disabilities" width="25%" />

## Accessibility Principles

According to [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/) or WCAG, Web contents should be: 

**Perceivable**

- Provide text alternatives for non-text content.
- Provide captions and other alternatives for multimedia.
- Create content that can be presented in different ways, including by assistive technologies, without losing meaning.
- Make it easier for users to see and hear content.

**Operable**

- Make all functionality available from a keyboard.
- Give users enough time to read and use content.
- Do not use content that causes seizures or physical reactions.
- Help users navigate and find content.
- Make it easier to use inputs other than keyboard.

**Understandable**

- Make text readable and understandable.
- Make content appear and operate in predictable ways.
- Help users avoid and correct mistakes.

**Robust**

- Maximize compatibility with current and future user tools.

# Motivation

> - Why are we doing this?

Author: Sure

- What use cases does it support?
- What is the expected outcome?

## Why are we doing this? 

Without proper accessibility, certain functionality used in web sites is not available to some users with disabilities, especially people who rely on screen readers and people who cannot use a mouse. 

Making our products accessible is important for two reasons.  
- it's the right thing to do. We believe that everyone deserves to be able to use our products, regardless of their abilities.
- It'll help build trust with our customers. By making our products accessible, we can expand our potential customer base and make our products more appealing to a wider range of people. 

> [The Business Case Study for Accessibility](https://www.w3.org/WAI/business-case/)

**Making customers happy & respecting human rights:**  

> > In 2020, A 29 year old banker who is visually impaired opened petitions to make [zomato](https://www.change.org/p/zomato-make-zomato-accessible-with-screen-readers-for-visually-challenged-people) & [swiggy](https://www.change.org/p/swiggy-make-swiggy-accessible-with-screen-readers-in-android-for-visually-challenged-people) accessible because they couldn’t order food from it due to their inaccessible apps.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> In 2020, A 29 year old banker who is visually impaired opened petitions to make [Zomato](https://www.change.org/p/zomato-make-zomato-accessible-with-screen-readers-for-visually-challenged-people) & [Swiggy](https://www.change.org/p/swiggy-make-swiggy-accessible-with-screen-readers-in-android-for-visually-challenged-people) accessible because they couldn’t order food from it due to their inaccessible apps.  
```

> Over **15,000 & 27,000 people had signed the petition.**  

> > Later zomato, swiggy listened to the people and [improved their accessibility.](https://theprint.in/tech/why-the-visually-challenged-are-signing-petitions-addressed-to-apps-such-as-zomato-swiggy/507282/) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Later Zomato & Swiggy listened to the people and [improved their accessibility.](https://theprint.in/tech/why-the-visually-challenged-are-signing-petitions-addressed-to-apps-such-as-zomato-swiggy/507282/) 
```

**Accessibility laws & policies** 

> While in India, there's no mandatory law to building accessible web apps, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While in India, there are no mandatory laws to build accessible web apps, 
```

> There's still [policies/laws](https://www.w3.org/WAI/policies/india/) which are passed to ensure rights of disabled people remains intact.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
there are still [policies/laws](https://www.w3.org/WAI/policies/india/) that are passed to ensure that the rights of disabled people remain intact.
```

- [Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (RPD)](https://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A2016-49_1.pdf)
- [**Mandatory** Guidelines for Indian Government Websites](https://guidelines.india.gov.in/)

## The current state  

In the current state, blade components are not very accessible out of the box, and neither are our existing frontend products. 

Here’s the screen reader accessibility of Razorpay mobile app

- Missing accessibilityLabel in input box.
- Missing accessibilityRole=button in buttons
- Missing accessibilityRole=link in links
- Grouping text together so they get announced at once.
- Unlabeled password toggle icon 
- Wrongly focus on text input's placeholder text

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/167380507-71e60b7f-d36e-42b3-b649-911400e2c66f.mp4

> Even though only a few of the teams are on boarded to blade, when more teams will migrate this will become a problem since every app/site will be inaccessible if we don’t implement accessibility in blade components. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Even though only a few teams are onboarded to blade, this could become a major problem when more teams migrate since every app/site won't be completely accessible if we don’t implement accessibility centrally in the core blade components. 
```

Adding accessible components to blade will iron out all these inconsistencies and teams can build more accessible apps with minimal effort.

## What is the expected outcome? 

> The goal of this RFC is to lay the foundations so that we can ship blade components that are accessible out of the box such that consumers don't have to worry about every minute detail. Here are couple of areas that this RFC will touch upon: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The goal of this RFC is to lay the foundations so that we can ship accessible components out of the box so that consumers don't have to worry about every minute detail. Here are couple of areas that this RFC will touch upon: 
```

  - Screen reader support
    - Cross platform solution to aria attributes
    - Implement WAI-ARIA [design patterns](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.1/#accordion)
- Native
  - Focus management
    - [Focus trap](https://github.com/focus-trap/focus-trap)
  - Screen reader support
    - Cross platform solution to aria attributes
    - Implement WAI-ARIA [design patterns](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.1/#accordion)
- A11y testing
    - Static analysis
    - Jest unit tests
    - Manual testing
- Guidelines
  - General web accessibility guidelines

## Out of scope

- [Motion](https://github.com/razorpay/blade/blob/master/rfcs/2022-03-22-motion-rfc.md)  
  We will pick up motion accessibility at a later point, we are first prioritizing foundations.

# Keyboard Accessibility

> [Specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/keyboard-operation.html)

**Target:** Everyone and especially people with motor disabilities who use a keyboard to navigate.  
**Goal:** Ensure users who cannot use the mouse (blind, motor disabilities) can access the crucial parts of the app through keyboard.  

> For a web page to be accessible, all interactive elements must be operable via the keyboard, Not all users are able to use a mouse to navigate a web page, Keyboard-only and screen reader users rely on navigating and using a web page with only a keyboard. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a web page to be accessible, all interactive elements must be operable via the keyboard. Not all users are able to use a mouse to navigate a web page, keyboard-only and screen reader users rely on navigating and using a web page with a physical or a virtual keyboard.
```

- [Manual testing](#manual-testing)

## Keyboard tab order

> [Specification](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#focus-order)

Tab order is important for proper navigation through a keyboard interface. 
The tab order of the page must be logical and follow the visual order of elements on the page.

**Best practices for logical tab order:**

- Structure html so that the reading/navigation [order is correct](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C27).
- If necessary, use CSS to control the visual presentation of the elements on the page.
- [Avoid using tabindex](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44) values of 1 or greater to change the default keyboard navigation order.

## Using tabindex

`tabindex` attribute authors can make the element focusable and appear in [sequential focus order](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#sequential-focus-navigation)

Setting tabindex to any non-negative integer makes elements focusable, allow or prevent them from being sequentially focusable, and determine their relative ordering

> When set to `0`, the element becomes focusable by keyboard and via programatic means with `focus()`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When set to `0`, the element becomes focusable by keyboard and via programmatic means with `focus()`. 
```

> When set to `-1`, the element becomes focusable programatically, but it does not become part of the keyboard focus order.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When set to `-1`, the element becomes focusable programmatically, but it does not become part of the keyboard focus order.
```

The following table describes tabindex behavior in modern browsers:

| tabindex attribute |	Focusable with mouse or programatically |	Tab navigable |
| :-- | :-- | :-- |
| not present	| The user agent will decide | The user agent will decide |
| Negative (tabindex="-1")	| Yes | No, can only be focused programatically |
| Zero (tabindex="0") | Yes | Yes, In tab order relative to element's position in document | 
| Positive (tabindex="2") | Yes | Yes, tabindex value determines where this element is positioned in the tab order | 

> > Warning: avoid using positive values for tabindex. Using positive values means authors will have to set (and maintain) tabindex values for all focusable elements on the page whenever they use one or more positive values for tabindex.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Warning: Avoid using positive values for tabindex. Using positive values means authors will have to set (and maintain) tabindex values for all focusable elements on the page whenever they use one or more positive values for tabindex.  
```

> *[Failure of Success Criterion 2.4.3](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44) due to using tabindex to create a tab order that does not preserve meaning and operability*

## Skip navigations

> [Specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/NOTE-WCAG20-TECHS-20130905/G1)

A skip navigation link provides a way for keyboard and screen reader users to skip to main content of a webpage.  

> Without skip links, keyboard and screen reader users must navigate a long list of navigation links and other elements before ever arriving at the main content, This can be particularly difficult for users with some forms of motor disabilities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Without skip links, keyboard and screen reader users must navigate a long list of navigation links and other elements before ever arriving at the main content. This can be particularly difficult for users with some forms of motor disabilities.
```

**Temporarily hidden skip links**

> Most common type of skip links are which that is hidden until the user navigates to it with a keyboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most common type of skip links are the ones that are hidden until the user navigates to it with a keyboard.
```

The link must be:

- Hidden by default
- Accessible to keyboard navigation
- Visible when it is focused
- Set focus to the main content area when activated

### Implementations

Skip nav implementations are fairly simple: 

> [Live Demo](https://stackblitz.com/edit/react-ts-nnnymu?file=App.tsx)

```html
<body>
  <a class='skip-link' href='#main-content'>
    Skip Navigation or Skip to Content
  </a>
  <main id='main-content'>
    Content here
  </main>
</body>
```

The `skip-link` class here is a screen reader only [visually hidden](https://webaim.org/techniques/css/invisiblecontent/) class, which is only accessible through screen readers. By using the `:focus` pesudo class it becomes visible when focused.

- [ReachUI SkipNav](https://reach.tech/skip-nav/)
- [ChakraUI SkipNav](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/components/navigation/skip-nav)

## Composite widgets

> *What are composite widgets?*

Reviewer 3: We can skip the question here maybe? I don't think we mentioned a question in the "Skip Navigations" or the "Using tabindex" sections, plus this is self explanatory.

Author: Will do.

A composite is a widget that may contain navigable descendants or childrens. Composite widgets should only have single navigation tab stop.

> Once the composite widget has focus, It's required to provide a separate navigation mechanism for users to navigate to elements that are descendants (generally with arrow keys).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the composite widget has focus, it should provide for a separate navigation mechanism for users to navigate to elements that are descendants (generally with arrow keys).
```

- When the component contains focus and the user presses a navigation key that moves focus within the component (eg: arrow keys)
  - set `tabindex=-1` on the element that has `tabindex=0`.
  - Set `tabindex=0` on the element that will become focused as a result of the key event.
  - Set focus with `element.focus()`, on the element that has `tabindex=0`.

**Roving tabindex keyboard accessibility**

- Pressing <kbd>↑</kbd> moves focus to the previous element if orientation is vertical or not defined.
- Pressing <kbd>↓</kbd> moves focus to the next element if orientation is vertical or not defined.
- Pressing <kbd>→</kbd> moves focus to the next element if orientation is horizontal or not defined.
- Pressing <kbd>←</kbd> moves focus to the previous element if orientation is horizontal or not defined.
- Pressing <kbd>Home</kbd> or <kbd>PageUp</kbd> moves focus to the first element.
- Pressing <kbd>End</kbd> or <kbd>PageDown</kbd> moves focus to the last element.

## Implementations

There are various third party library implementations for roving tabindex pattern.  

We tried out 3 of them to understand the pros and cons for each and decided on X.

> - FluentUI - [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-comp-fluentui-focuszone-0sjyv1?file=/src/App.tsx) | [Doc](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/fluentui#/controls/web/focuszone) | [Pros and cons](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-comp-fluentui-focuszone-0sjyv1?file=/src/pros-and-cons.md)

Reviewer 3: What's the status of this? Have we decided on which third party library we are proceeding with? The pros and cons of whichever one we decide should come here in the rfc.

Author: > The pros and cons of whichever one we decide should come here in the rfc.  

yes.

We haven't decided on which library to pick up yet. Needs discussion with @kamleshchandnani @chaitanyadeorukhkar, plus the decision could be dependent on other factors like focus management & screen reader support.

Reviewer: Can we add the pros and cons in collapsible section in this readme itself?

Checklist: 

- Do all the interactive elements in the page are: 
  - Navigatable through keyboard? ([Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G202))
  - Actions can be triggered by keyboard? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F54.html))
  - Remains focused until user moves it? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F55.html))
- Does the tab order match the logical reading order of the page? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44.html))
- Focus visible ([Failure Of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F78.html))
  - Do all keyboard interactive elements display visual keyboard focus?
  - Is the visual keyboard focus easy to identify?
- During the navigation, are there any instances when you become trapped in an element? ([Failure of Success Criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F10.html))
- Make sure hidden popuops or titles are accessible through keyboard. 

# Focus management

> Specification

> **Target:** Everyone and especially people with visual impairments or cognitive limitations, motor disabilities.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Target:** Everyone, especially people with visual impairments or cognitive limitations & motor disabilities.  
```

> **Goal:** Setting guidelines for general focus behaviours & Providing screen reader & keyboard users a smooth experience by managing focus behavior for certain elements like Modals/Page transition etc. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Goal:** Setting guidelines for general focus behaviours & providing screen reader & keyboard users a smooth experience by managing focus behavior for certain elements like Modals/Page transition etc. 
```

Well-planned focus management is important to ensuring a comfortable user experience & to guide the user through the intended flow of the app.

Focus management goes hand in hand with keyboard accessibility, so there will be interoperability between the two. 

### Areas to cover

- [Focus order](#keyboard-tab-order)
- [Focus ring styling](#focus-ring-styling)
- [Focus traps](#focus-trap)
  - Focus restoration
- Page transitions

## Focus order

> Focus order or tab order we already covered in [keyboard tab order section](#keyboard-tab-order)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have already covered focus order or tab order in the [keyboard tab order section](#keyboard-tab-order)
```

## Focus ring styling

> The focus ring must be visible to all users, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The focus ring must be visible to all users. 
```

By default, the browser uses the user agent specific focus styling. But this behaviour can be overriden with CSS. 

Best practices for focus styling:

- Provide focus styles that are highly visible.
- Make sure that a visible element has focus at all times when using a keyboard.
- Avoid using `*:focus { outline: none }` snippet to hide focus
- Design focus rings such that it has proper contrast

> Not providing visible focus ring is [Failure of Success Criterion 2.4.7](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F78)

**Keyboard only focus rings**

> While focus indicators are neccesary,  

Reviewer 3: Remove the line break.

> Mouse clicks also changes the focus, for example clicking on a button also makes the focus ring visible.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
mouse clicks also change the focus, for example clicking on a button also makes the focus ring visible.  
```

This behavior can be undesirable from design perspective, preferring focus styling to only be present only if a keyboard is used can be a solution. 

<img width="45%" src="./images/accessibility/focus-visible-demo.gif" alt="Demo of focus visible css pesudo class, showing two buttons and comparing the results" />

**Implementations**

- CSS
- ReactAria

**CSS:**  

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-css-focus-ring-051xff?file=/src/App.tsx)

> CSS provides us with a pesudo class called [`:focus-visible`](https://css-tricks.com/keyboard-only-focus-styles). Browser support for focus-visible is [good enough.](https://caniuse.com/?search=%3Afocus-visible).  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CSS provides us with a pesudo class called [`:focus-visible`](https://css-tricks.com/keyboard-only-focus-styles). Browser support for focus-visible is [good enough](https://caniuse.com/?search=%3Afocus-visible).  
```

And we can also use the [official pollyfill](https://github.com/WICG/focus-visible) for older browsers.

**ReactAria:**  

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-reactaria-focus-ring-hc3cub?file=/src/App.tsx)

ReactAria provides a [FocusRing](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-aria/FocusRing.html) component which solves this. 

> While this works great, this solution can be a bit overkill since react aria does this all with javascript and have it's own event handling system.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While this works great, this solution can be a bit of an overkill since ReactAria does this all with JavaScript and has its own event handling system.  
```

> I think it will be better and easier if we `use the platform™` 

Reviewer 3: These sentence is a little vague and does not explain what we mean by "using the platform".

Author: Sure will rephrase.

## Focus trap

> [Specification]()

Trapping focus is a behaviour we usually want when there is modality in a page. 

**Why focus traps?**

> Focus traps are essential to communicate a modal's bounds to groups of people who are visually impaired or have mobility issues, And helps inform what is and is not modal content.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Focus traps are essential to communicate a modal's bounds to people who are visually impaired or have mobility issues, and it helps inform them what is and is not contained within a modal.
```

> The idea is that if for part of the site we prevent clicks, we should also prevent focus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The idea is that if for parts of the site where we prevent clicks, we should also prevent focus on the same elements.
```

- People with low vision who rely on screen readers need to know when the modal opens.

> - People with low vision who cannot properly see the focus ring can get lost if focus isn't contained in the modal, This can be confusing and disorienting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- People with low vision who cannot properly see the focus ring can get lost if focus isn't contained in the modal, this can be confusing and disorienting.
```

- People with mobility issues using keyboard could tab out of the modal and have a hard time getting back into the modal.

**Best practices for focus traps**

- Ensure users don't get permanently trapped in the focus trap, If the user can open the modal with keyboard, they should also have the ability to exit the modal with keyboard.

> - The focus should loop When reaching the last or first element inside modal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The focus should loop when reaching the last or first element inside modal.
```

- [ReactAria FocusScope](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-aria/FocusScope.html)

**Inert**

> [Demo](https://lx5rik.csb.app/)

In the [HTML spec](https://github.com/WICG/inert/blob/main/explainer.md) there's a new proposal/property `inert`, when present, makes the browser "ignore" user input events for the element, including focus events and events from assistive technologies. This can be used for focus trapping. 

Downsides of inert: 

- Browser [support is very bad](https://caniuse.com/?search=inert), only works on modern browsers under experimental flag
- Polyfill is [expensive performance-wise](https://github.com/WICG/inert#performance-and-gotchas)
Although the browser support for it is very bad, and we will need the [polyfill](https://github.com/WICG/inert).
- Won't handle other edge cases like focus restoration.

**ReactAria**

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-reactaria-focustrap-6z537u?file=/src/App.tsx)

ReactAria's `FocusScope` component is a fully fledged solution with other edge cases handled for us. 

It also handles: 

- Focus restoration to trigger
- Auto focusing to children elements

> Considering the `inert` attribute is not supported in major browsers & we will have to write custom logic to handle other edge cases. It's better to use the ReactAria's component in this case. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Considering the `inert` attribute is not supported in major browsers & we will have to write custom logic to handle other edge cases, it's better to use the ReactAria's component in this case. 
```

| not present              | The user agent will decide               | The user agent will decide                                                       |
| Negative (tabindex="-1") | Yes                                      | No, can only be focused programmatically                                         |
| Zero (tabindex="0")      | Yes                                      | Yes, In tab order relative to element's position in document                     |
| Positive (tabindex="2")  | Yes                                      | Yes, tabindex value determines where this element is positioned in the tab order |

> Warning: Avoid using positive values for tabindex. Using positive values means authors will have to set (and maintain) tabindex values for all focusable elements on the page whenever they use one or more positive values for tabindex.

> _[Failure of Success Criterion 2.4.3](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44) due to using tabindex to create a tab order that does not preserve meaning and operability_

**Native: Using `accessible` prop**

> In react-native there is no `tabindex` like behaviour for components, instead we have access to the [`accessible`](https://reactnative.dev/docs/accessibility#accessible) prop, setting `accessible` to true elements get grouped into a single selectable component.

Author: Added

- Pressing <kbd>→</kbd> moves focus to the next element if orientation is horizontal or not defined.
- Pressing <kbd>←</kbd> moves focus to the previous element if orientation is horizontal or not defined.
- Pressing <kbd>Home</kbd> or <kbd>PageUp</kbd> moves focus to the first element.
- Pressing <kbd>End</kbd> or <kbd>PageDown</kbd> moves focus to the last element.

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/170195582-85cb688a-8e10-42de-9154-420d5c8873ad.mov

#### Platform Specific Implementation <!-- omit in toc -->

**Web:**

There are various third party library implementations for roving tabindex pattern.

We tried out 3 of them to understand the pros and cons for each and decided on X.

**FluentUI** - [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-comp-fluentui-focuszone-0sjyv1?file=/src/App.tsx) | [Doc](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/fluentui#/controls/web/focuszone)

<details>
  <summary>Pros and cons</summary>

**Bundle size:** ~12kb

**Pros:**

- Easy to use
- Handles roving index by default
- Can handle nested focus zones
- Provides tabbable focus, means we can enable use of tab + arrow keys
- Support layout grid behavior (we might not need this)

**Cons:**

> - Not much flexibility to write our own logic, doesn’t provide any focus manager

Reviewer: how will it be useful? maybe can you elaborate it a little in the content?

Author: done.

Although ReactAria does provides low level primitives to manage focus like `useFocusManager`

**Pros:**

- Provides other helpful features with it’s focus package, which makes it worth the bundle size compared to other solutions, with other libs we will have to look for alternatives for:
  - [FocusScope](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-aria/FocusRing.html) (Trapping focus)
  - [FocusRing](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-aria/FocusRing.html)
  - [useFocusRing](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-aria/useFocusRing.html)
- Provides low level primitives for building roving index like behaviors, eg: useFocusManager, getFocusableTreeWalker, createFocusManager
- Picking react aria will also encourage use of react-native-aria & the eco system of react aria.

**Cons:**

- Doesn’t provide roving index behavior by default
- A lot of manual logic and code has to be written to implement a proper Roving index component which handles edge cases,
- The implementation in the codesandbox has various bugs & edge cases, for eg: initially the elements don't have tabIndex set, these kinds of edge cases we need to solve for.

</details>

> **Ariakit** - [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-comp-ariakit-composite-ewc9i4?file=/src/App.tsx) | [Doc](https://reakit.io/docs/composite/)

Reviewer: I think ariakit looks fine to me in this current context based on the flexibility and capabilities it provides. Although documentation can be quite tricky I think if a few basic/advanced interactions are sorted then we shall be ok to take this bet.

Author: Yes it's pretty nice :( but the unsuitability is the issue I'm worried about, I don't think we should take this bet. We will be in a cycle of fixing breaking changes.

- Lots of other features, like [composite groups, typeahead, input, hover, separator](https://github.com/ariakit/ariakit/tree/main/packages/ariakit/src/composite)
- [Supports 2d navigation](https://reakit.io/docs/composite/#two-dimensional-navigation) same as FluentUI
- Support virtual focus + roving index. ++respect!
- Ariakit also provides primitives and utilities like useFocusTrap & useFocusable, although they will increase the bundle size further

**Cons:**

- The biggest issue with ariakit is that it’s not stable yet :(  
  So ariakit is the successor to reakit, Haz has been developing it for over 4 years now.
  But as the doc says ariakit is better but still the API is not stable and can have breaking changes
- The new version of ariakit lacks documentation
- No separate package scope for their focus utilities, we will have to rely on treeshaking to be able to shave all other unnecessary components.

</details>

**Native:**

For native we are scoping out keyboard accessibility, because it will only be effective in scenarios when using a hardware keyboard. We will revisit this once we have usecases for it.

> #### aria-activedescendant <!-- omit in toc -->

Author: It's under composite widgets, a variation of roving index pattern.

> #### aria-activedescendant <!-- omit in toc -->

Author: Fixed added a header for both.

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/170203071-5688c459-64fc-4435-860d-fc17b6d26393.mov

#### Platform Specific Implementation <!-- omit in toc -->

**Web:**

- CSS
- ReactAria

**CSS:**

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-css-focus-ring-051xff?file=/src/App.tsx)

CSS provides us with a pesudo class called [`:focus-visible`](https://css-tricks.com/keyboard-only-focus-styles). Browser support for focus-visible is [good enough](https://caniuse.com/?search=%3Afocus-visible).  
And we can also use the [official pollyfill](https://github.com/WICG/focus-visible) for older browsers.

**ReactAria:**

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-reactaria-focus-ring-hc3cub?file=/src/App.tsx)

ReactAria provides a [FocusRing](https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-aria/FocusRing.html) component which solves this.

While this works great, this solution can be a bit of an overkill since ReactAria does this all with JavaScript and has its own event handling system.  
I think it will be better and easier if we stick to `:focus-visible` CSS property which is becoming standard in browser & a platform feature.

**Native:**

> In native we don't need to handle focus-visible since the focus will only be visible when the screen reader is open.

Author: On native focus ring styling is based on the screen reader application.

In the [HTML spec](https://github.com/WICG/inert/blob/main/explainer.md) there's a new proposal/property `inert`, when present, makes the browser "ignore" user input events for the element, including focus events and events from assistive technologies. This can be used for focus trapping.

Downsides of inert:

- Browser [support is very bad](https://caniuse.com/?search=inert), only works on modern browsers under experimental flag
- Polyfill is [expensive performance-wise](https://github.com/WICG/inert#performance-and-gotchas)
  Although the browser support for it is very bad, and we will need the [polyfill](https://github.com/WICG/inert).
- Won't handle other edge cases like focus restoration.

**ReactAria**

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-reactaria-focustrap-6z537u?file=/src/App.tsx)

ReactAria's `FocusScope` component is a fully fledged solution with other edge cases handled for us.

It also handles:

- Focus restoration to trigger
- Auto focusing to children elements

Considering the `inert` attribute is not supported in major browsers & we will have to write custom logic to handle other edge cases, it's better to use the ReactAria's component in this case.

> **Native:**

Reviewer: can you attach a demo and video for this on native?

Author: Attached video for most of the native demos, but this one is tricky. see
https://github.com/razorpay/blade/pull/463#discussion_r886387385

To simulate `inert` behaviour in react-native we have platform specific accessibility props:

- For android: [`importantForAccessibility`](https://reactnative.dev/docs/accessibility#importantforaccessibility-android)
- For iOS: [`accessibilityViewIsModal`](https://reactnative.dev/docs/accessibility#accessibilityviewismodal-ios) & [`accessibilityElementsHidden`](https://reactnative.dev/docs/accessibility#accessibilityelementshidden-ios)

> 

Reviewer: once you're done with all the evaluations, let's put a table for a summary of what to use for what platform for a particular a11y thing. it'll basically a snapshot of the information you've already put above. for eg: we'll use reac-aria for focus trap on web and on native we'll use the platform specific attributes, etc.

[ARIA Authoring Practices Guide (APG)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/), recommends approaches to help developers make widgets, navigation, and behaviors accessible using WAI-ARIA roles, states, and properties.

In blade, the components that we are going to build should follow these patterns, And blade developers should implement proper aria roles, keyboard interaction following the documented patterns in APG

All the common UI widgets are available with proper documentation about it's behaviour and interactions, for example:

- [Accordion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/accordion/)
- [Dialog](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/dialogmodal/)
- [Checkbox](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/checkbox/)
- [And more..](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/)

While building each blade component we should read upon these patterns and ensure they behave as expected.

## Design Accessibility

Designing with accessibility in mind is an important part of the process, ensuring that our designs have proper color contrast, visual hierearchy & legible text is important.

#### Best practices when using color styles and making them accessible: <!-- omit in toc -->

> - Use colors which are dark enough and atleast pass the AA standards.

Reviewer 4: @anuraghazra We can also attach this link here - [https://usecontrast.com/guide](https://usecontrast.com/guide)

Author: great resource! Thanks.

- Don’t use color alone to make critical information understandable
- Don’t use color as the only visual means of conveying information
- Design [legible & usable focus states](#focus-ring-styling)

<img src="./images/accessibility/typography-contrast-ratio.png" alt="Typography color contrast ratio table" width="70%" />

#### Best practices when using typography:  <!-- omit in toc -->

> - Always use the primary font (Lato). It’ very readable if used in a hiererchy.

Reviewer 4: @anuraghazra Don't call out `Lato` here. It might change going forward.

- Make sure that the base font-size is used in the majority of the page. We’ve kept the base-font-size to 14px which works well with our use case.
- Use larger font sizes on titles, and make sure to establish a hiererchy if there are more than 2 sections on a page so that user can easily scan the page.
- Don’t use underlines in any state if they are not links.
- Limit the font-style variations. Try to keep things consistent. Do not overuse Bolds, All caps, etc.
- Use markup wherever required. Do not use it for anything except code snippets.
- Don’t make the content (block of text) width too long. Wrap,
  - Titles: at max. of 70% of the page width.
  - Subtitles & Paras: at max. of 50%-60% of the page width.
- Make sure the text doesn’t overlap in between two different sections.

> 

Reviewer 4: @anuraghazra We can also add:
- For legibility, always use the same width numbers. As we deal in the financial ecosystem, it makes it more readable when we read numbers in combination. We should always use a monospaced number font. It should not necessarily be a coding font, it can be a generic font as well.

## Accessibility for whom?

Accessibility is essential for some, useful for all. It's not just for people with disabilities, accessible websites also improve the user experience of normal users.

For example:

- Ensuring keyboard accessibility helps people with temporary/permanent mobility but also improves the experience for normal users by providing a better user experience for components like Select or Modals.
- Large buttons and links helps people with reduced dexterity but also improve the user experience of mobile devices.
- Providing captions for a video can benefit users who watch videos in loud environments or in a library.
- Sufficient color contrast is good for different lighting conditions and people with visual impairments.
- Older people with changing abilities due to aging can benefit from accessible experiences.

> Check out this youtube [video about Web Accessibility Perspectives](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3f31oufqFSM) by W3C for more details about how accessibility can help wide range of people with or without disabilities.

> ## Various types of disabilities

Author: Not really sure how would I format it in table. 

Like this whole section? 

```

- **Visual:**  
  Anything that deals with sight, eg: people who have different types of sight like color blindness.
- **Cognitive:**  
  Difficulties with concentration, memory, judgment, problem solving, eg: older people with changing abilities.
- **Mobility:**  
  Anything that affects physical movement, eg: broken/missing arm.
- **Auditory:**  
  Disabilities related to sound or audio, eg: someone who is deaf.

Other subcategories based on [Microsoft’s inclusive design](https://www.microsoft.com/design/inclusive):

- **Permanent, disability that does not go away:**
  - Example: Someone who is deaf
- **Temporary, disability that will go away in time:**
  - Example: Someone who has an ear infection
- **Situational, Context based disabilities:**
  - Example: Someone who is at a loud sporting event
  - Example: Using the web app in bright sunlight
  - Example: Using your phone one handedly in a crowded metro station
```

What would be the headers and such?

> ## Various types of disabilities

Reviewer 2: Type of disability, description, example

> ## Various types of disabilities

Author: That looks great thanks!

- **Permanent, disability that does not go away:**
  - Example: Someone who is deaf
- **Temporary, disability that will go away in time:**
  - Example: Someone who has an ear infection
- **Situational, Context based disabilities:**
  - Example: Someone who is at a loud sporting event
  - Example: Using the web app in bright sunlight
  - Example: Using your phone one handedly in a crowded metro station

<img src="./images/accessibility/ms-inclusive-design.png" alt="Microsoft Inclusive Design Shows Spectrum Of Disabilities" width="25%" />

## Accessibility Principles

According to [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/) or WCAG, Web contents should be:

**Perceivable**

- Provide text alternatives for non-text content.
- Provide captions and other alternatives for multimedia.
- Create content that can be presented in different ways, including by assistive technologies, without losing meaning.
- Make it easier for users to see and hear content.

**Operable**

- Make all functionality available from a keyboard.
- Give users enough time to read and use content.

> - Do not use content that causes seizures or physical reactions.

Author: Actually motion is out of scope of accessibility, atleast for now.

> Over **15,000 & 27,000 people had signed the petition.**  
> Later Zomato, Swiggy listened to the people and [improved their accessibility.](https://theprint.in/tech/why-the-visually-challenged-are-signing-petitions-addressed-to-apps-such-as-zomato-swiggy/507282/)

**Accessibility laws & policies**

While in India, there are no mandatory laws to build accessible web apps, there are still [policies/laws](https://www.w3.org/WAI/policies/india/) that are passed to ensure that the rights of disabled people remain intact.

- [Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (RPD)](https://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A2016-49_1.pdf)
- [**Mandatory** Guidelines for Indian Government Websites](https://guidelines.india.gov.in/)

## The current state

In the current state, blade components are not very accessible out of the box, and neither are our existing frontend products.

Here’s the screen reader accessibility of Razorpay mobile app

- Missing `accessibilityLabel` in input box.
- Missing `accessibilityRole=button` in buttons

> - Missing `accessibilityRole=link` in links

Author: 🤔 not sure if this would be the right place tho. What do you recommend?

> - Missing `accessibilityRole=link` in links

Reviewer 2: Optional, I though it would be nice to know for readers to know. Perhaps one liner. Feel free to skip if you feel otherwise.

## What is the expected outcome?

The goal of this RFC is to lay the foundations so that we can ship accessible components out of the box so that consumers don't have to worry about every minute detail. Here are couple of areas that this RFC will touch upon:

- Research about cross platform accessibility between web and native.
- Ensure components are accessible through assistive technologies.
- Ensure components adhere to the [WAI-ARIA design patterns](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/)
- Set accessibility guidelines to make sure products built with blade are accessible by people with various disabilities.
- Document the component development lifecycle for blade developers on building accessible components. (Similar to a checklist)

By baking in accessibility at the foundational level we will ensure our products are accessible to as many people as possible, and this includes people with disabilities.

# Detailed Design

## Keyboard Accessibility

> [Specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/keyboard-operation.html)

> **Accessibility Principal:** Operable  

Author: lol my english. xD

> _[Failure of Success Criterion 2.4.3](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F44) due to using tabindex to create a tab order that does not preserve meaning and operability_

**Native: Using `accessible` prop**

In react-native there is no `tabindex` like behaviour for components, instead we have access to the [`accessible`](https://reactnative.dev/docs/accessibility#accessible) prop, setting `accessible` to true elements get grouped into a single selectable component.

> [Demo](https://snack.expo.dev/V5MQ8yne8)

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/170967381-c3d4923c-fb2f-4e9c-b5b4-dec1bc778f67.mp4

### Composite widgets

A composite is a widget that may contain navigable descendants or childrens. Composite widgets should only have single navigation tab stop.
Once the composite widget has focus, it should provide for a separate navigation mechanism for users to navigate to elements that are descendants (generally with arrow keys).

You can think of composite widgets as a way of grouping multiple elements into single navigatable element.

Examples of composite widgets are:

- Radio Groups
- Tabs
- Listbox
- Toolbars

#### Roving Tabindex

> > [Specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.1/#kbd_roving_tabindex)

Author: God damn, actually WAI-ARIA spec has been revamped with a new website, but they don't redirect to new content.

> One way to manage focus within `composite` widgets is roving tabindex pattern.  

Author: Yes aria-activedescendant 
https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/practices/keyboard-interface/#kbd_focus_activedescendant

**Bundle size:** ~15kb tree shakable depending on which features we use

**Pros:**

- Easy to use
- Most spec compliant and holistic implementation
- Very flexible with its hooks based architecture. Composition is ariakit’s best selling point
- Lots of other features, like [composite groups, typeahead, input, hover, separator](https://github.com/ariakit/ariakit/tree/main/packages/ariakit/src/composite)
- [Supports 2d navigation](https://reakit.io/docs/composite/#two-dimensional-navigation) same as FluentUI
- Support virtual focus + roving index. ++respect!
- Ariakit also provides primitives and utilities like useFocusTrap & useFocusable, although they will increase the bundle size further

**Cons:**

- The biggest issue with ariakit is that it’s not stable yet :(  
  So ariakit is the successor to reakit, Haz has been developing it for over 4 years now.
  But as the doc says ariakit is better but still the API is not stable and can have breaking changes
- The new version of ariakit lacks documentation
- No separate package scope for their focus utilities, we will have to rely on treeshaking to be able to shave all other unnecessary components.

</details>

> 

Reviewer 2: Which one are we going ahead with? Needs a conclusion section here. Or if we've open question on this.

- Polyfill is [expensive performance-wise](https://github.com/WICG/inert#performance-and-gotchas)
  Although the browser support for it is very bad, and we will need the [polyfill](https://github.com/WICG/inert).
- Won't handle other edge cases like focus restoration.

**ReactAria**

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-reactaria-focustrap-6z537u?file=/src/App.tsx)

ReactAria's `FocusScope` component is a fully fledged solution with other edge cases handled for us.

It also handles:

- Focus restoration to trigger
- Auto focusing to children elements

Considering the `inert` attribute is not supported in major browsers & we will have to write custom logic to handle other edge cases, it's better to use the ReactAria's component in this case.

**Native:**

To simulate `inert` behaviour in react-native we have platform specific accessibility props:

**iOS:**

iOS has better accessibility support for modals than android,
In iOS we can set [`accessibilityViewIsModal`](https://reactnative.dev/docs/accessibility#accessibilityviewismodal-ios) which will cause voice overs to ignore any other elements outside the modal.

> **Android:**

Author: I'm not really sure actually, I didn't find any focus scope utility for android and even saw some component libraries like native-base & reactnative-paper. 

So what should we do in this case is for cases where we want modality and trap the focus we should use the modal from `react-native` because that is accessible out of the box.

| `off (default)` | Indicates that updates to the region should not be presented to the user unless the user is currently focused on that region.                                                  |
| `polite`        | Indicates that updates to the region should be presented at the next graceful opportunity, such as at the end of speaking the current sentence or when the user pauses typing. |

#### Platform Specific Implementation <!-- omit in toc -->

**Web:**

In web we can simply add `aria-live` to any element or use [roles which have implicit live region attributes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions#roles_with_implicit_live_region_attributes)

> [Demo](https://codesandbox.io/s/blade-a11y-rfc-arialive-demo-h53z61?file=/src/App.tsx)

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/35374649/170882365-47b9caa8-eff8-4572-a319-d0f63785f497.mov

We can also use the [@react-aria/live-announcer](https://github.com/adobe/react-spectrum/tree/main/packages/%40react-aria/live-announcer) package which gives us programmatic way of triggering announcements with `announce()` function, by creating temporary live-regions.

> **Native:**

Author: Yes, every alert should this by default. 

In fact we can just add role="alert" in those scenarios.

- Implement `<VisuallyHidden />` component for [hidden content](#hidden-content)
- Ensure each component adhers to the [WAI-ARIA Authoring Pratices Guide](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/) 
- Ensure general accessibility guidelines are followed while building blade components, we discussed best practices for each category: 
  - Keyboard accessibility [best practices](#best-practices-for-logical-tab-order)
  - Focus ring [best practices](#best-practices-for-focus-styling)
  - Focus trap [best practices](#best-practices-for-focus-traps)
  - Semantic HTML [best practices](#best-practices-to-using-semantic-html)
  - Dynamic content [best practices](#best-practices-for-dynamic-contents)
  - Design [best practices](#best-practices-when-using-color-styles-and-making-them-accessible)
- Implement [automated testing tools](#tools--infrastructure) which discussed
- Do manual testing for [keyboard accesibility](#keyboard-accessibility), [focus management & screen readers.](#tools--infrastructure) 
  
# Drawbacks/Constraints

> Why should we _not_ do this? Maybe try to consider the following constraints

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> - Implementation cost, both in terms of code size and complexity.

Author: This is just the default template RFC text, I didn't added these. We can actually talk about bundle size but need to decide which library to use first.

> - Implementation cost, both in terms of code size and complexity.

Author: Don't need this section will update if necessary with bundlesize and all that info.

- [ ] Implement [live regions & `announce()` utilties](https://github.com/razorpay/blade/blob/anu/a11y-rfc/rfcs/2022-04-09-accessibility.md#platform-specific-implementation--6) for dynamic content announcements.
- [x] Implement `<VisuallyHidden />` component for [hidden content](#hidden-content)
- [ ] Ensure each component adhers to the [WAI-ARIA Authoring Pratices Guide](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/) 
- [ ] Ensure general accessibility guidelines are followed while building blade components, we discussed best practices for each category: 
  - Keyboard accessibility [best practices](#best-practices-for-logical-tab-order)
  - Focus ring [best practices](#best-practices-for-focus-styling)
  - Focus trap [best practices](#best-practices-for-focus-traps)
  - Semantic HTML [best practices](#best-practices-to-using-semantic-html)
  - Dynamic content [best practices](#best-practices-for-dynamic-contents)
  - Design [best practices](#best-practices-when-using-color-styles-and-making-them-accessible)

> - [x] Implement [automated testing tools](#tools--infrastructure) which discussed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [x] Implement [automated testing tools](#tools--infrastructure) which we discussed
```
